
# Release Profiles

- In Rust, _release profiles_ are predefined and customizable profiles with different configurations that allow a programmer to have more control over various options for compiling code.

```
$ cargo build
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.0s
$ cargo build --release
    Finished release [optimized] target(s) in 0.0s
```

- Cargo has two main profiles: the `dev` profile Cargo uses when you run `cargo build` and the `release` profile Cargo uses when you run `cargo build --release`.
- Cargo has default settings for each of the profiles that apply when you haven't explicitly added any `[profile.*]` sections in the project’s _Cargo.toml_ file.

Filename: Cargo.toml
```
[profile.dev]
opt-level = 0

[profile.release]
opt-level = 3
```

- The `opt-level` setting controls the number of optimizations Rust will apply to your code, with a range of 0 to 3. Applying more optimizations extends compiling time,

# Publish

The crate registry at [crates.io](https://crates.io/) distributes the source code of your packages, so it primarily hosts code that is open source.

## Documentation Comments

- Rust also has a particular kind of comment for documentation, known conveniently as a _documentation comment_, that will generate HTML documentation.
`
```rust
/// Adds one to the number given.
///
/// # Examples
///
/// ```
/// let arg = 5;
/// let answer = my_crate::add_one(arg);
///
/// assert_eq!(6, answer);
/// ```
pub fn add_one(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 1
}
```

- Documentation comments use three slashes, `///`, instead of two and support Markdown notation for formatting the text.
- Place documentation comments just before the item they’re documenting. It shows documentation comments for an `add_one` function in a crate named `my_crate`
- For convenience, running `cargo doc --open` will build the HTML for your current crate’s documentation and open the result in a web browser
- Adding example code blocks in your documentation comments can help demonstrate how to use your library, and doing so has an additional bonus: running `cargo test` will run the code examples in your documentation as tests

### Commonly Used Sections

- We used the `# Examples` Markdown heading to create a section in the HTML with the title “Examples.”
- Here are some other sections that crate authors commonly use in their documentation:
	-   **Panics**: The scenarios in which the function being documented could panic. Callers of the function who don’t want their programs to panic should make sure they don’t call the function in these situations.
	-   **Errors**: If the function returns a `Result`, describing the kinds of errors that might occur and what conditions might cause those errors to be returned can be helpful to callers so they can write code to handle the different kinds of errors in different ways.
	-   **Safety**: If the function is `unsafe` to call (we discuss unsafety in Chapter 19), there should be a section explaining why the function is unsafe and covering the invariants that the function expects callers to uphold.

### Commenting Contained Items

```rust
//! # My Crate
//!
//! `my_crate` is a collection of utilities to make performing certain
//! calculations more convenient.

/// Adds one to the number given.
// --snip--

```

- The style of doc comment `//!` adds documentation to the item that contains the comments rather than to the items following the comments.
- We typically use these doc comments inside the crate root file  or inside a module to document the crate or the module as a whole.
- Documentation comments within items are useful for describing crates and modules especially. Use them to explain the overall purpose of the container to help your users understand the crate’s organization.

## Exporting a Convenient Public API

```rust
//! # Art
//!
//! A library for modeling artistic concepts.

pub mod kinds {
    /// The primary colors according to the RYB color model.
    pub enum PrimaryColor {
        Red,
        Yellow,
        Blue,
    }

    /// The secondary colors according to the RYB color model.
    pub enum SecondaryColor {
        Orange,
        Green,
        Purple,
    }
}

pub mod utils {
    use crate::kinds::*;

    /// Combines two primary colors in equal amounts to create
    /// a secondary color.
    pub fn mix(c1: PrimaryColor, c2: PrimaryColor) -> SecondaryColor {
        // --snip--
    }
}
```

```rust
use art::kinds::PrimaryColor;
use art::utils::mix;

fn main() {
    let red = PrimaryColor::Red;
    let yellow = PrimaryColor::Yellow;
    mix(red, yellow);
}
```

The structure of your public API is a major consideration when publishing a crate. People who use your crate are less familiar with the structure than you are and might have difficulty finding the pieces they want to use if your crate has a large module hierarchy.

```rust
//! # Art
//!
//! A library for modeling artistic concepts.

pub use self::kinds::PrimaryColor;
pub use self::kinds::SecondaryColor;
pub use self::utils::mix;

pub mod kinds {
    // --snip--
}

pub mod utils {
    // --snip--
}
```

- You can re-export items to make a public structure that’s different from your private structure by using `pub use`
- The API documentation that `cargo doc` generates for this crate will now list and link re-exports on the front page

## Crates.io Account

- Before you can publish any crates, you need to create an account on [crates.io](https://crates.io/) and get an API token. To do so, visit the home page at [crates.io](https://crates.io/) and log in via a GitHub account.
- Once you’re logged in, visit your account settings at [https://crates.io/me/](https://crates.io/me/) and retrieve your API key. Then run the `cargo login` command with your API key: `cargo login abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz012345`

> This command will inform Cargo of your API token and store it locally in _~/.cargo/credentials_. Note that this token is a _secret_: do not share it with anyone else. If you do share it with anyone for any reason, you should revoke it and generate a new token on [crates.io](https://crates.io/).

## Metadata 

Even if you’ve chosen a unique name, when you run `cargo publish` to publish the crate at this point, you’ll get a warning and then an error

```
$ cargo publish
    Updating crates.io index
warning: manifest has no description, license, license-file, documentation, homepage or repository.
See https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html#package-metadata for more info.
--snip--
error: failed to publish to registry at https://crates.io

Caused by:
  the remote server responded with an error: missing or empty metadata fields: description, license. Please see https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html for how to upload metadata
```

- This errors because you’re missing some crucial information: a description and license are required so people will know what your crate does and under what terms they can use it. In _Cargo.toml_, add a description that's just a sentence or two, because it will appear with your crate in search results.

```
[package]
name = "guessing_game"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"
description = "A fun game where you guess what number the computer has chosen."
license = "MIT OR Apache-2.0"

[dependencies]
```

- For the `license` field, you need to give a _license identifier value_. The [Linux Foundation’s Software Package Data Exchange (SPDX)](http://spdx.org/licenses/) lists the identifiers you can use for this value

### Deprecate

- Because a publish is _permanent_. The version can never be overwritten, and the code cannot be delet
- Although you can’t remove previous versions of a crate, you can prevent any future projects from adding them as a new dependency. Yanking a version prevents new projects from depending on that version while allowing all existing projects that depend on it to continue.

```
$ cargo yank --vers 1.0.1
    Updating crates.io index
        Yank guessing_game@1.0.1
```

- To yank a version of a crate, in the directory of the crate that you’ve previously published, run `cargo yank` and specify which version you want to yank.
- By adding `--undo` to the command, you can also undo a yank and allow projects to start depending on a version again

# Workspace

As your project develops, you might find that the library crate continues to get bigger and you want to split your package further into multiple library crates.

- A _workspace_ is a set of packages that share the same _Cargo.lock_ and output directory.

Filename: Cargo.toml
```
[workspace]

members = [
    "adder",
    "add_one",
]
```

```
$ cargo new adder
     Created binary (application) `adder` package
$ cargo new add_one --lib
     Created library `add_one` package
```

```
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── add_one
│   ├── Cargo.toml
│   └── src
│       └── lib.rs
├── adder
│   ├── Cargo.toml
│   └── src
│       └── main.rs
└── target
```

```rust
// add_one/src/lib.rs
pub fn add_one(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 1
}
```

```
adder/Cargo.toml

[dependencies] add_one = { path = "../add_one" }`
```

```rust
// adder/src/main.rs
use add_one;

fn main() {
    let num = 10;
    println!("Hello, world! {num} plus one is {}!", add_one::add_one(num));
}
```

- The example workspace contains a binary and two libraries. The binary, which will provide the main functionality, will depend on the two libraries. One library will provide an `add_one` function, and a second library an `add_two` function

- The `adder` package doesn’t have its own _target_ directory. Even if we were to run `cargo build` from inside the _adder_ directory, the compiled artifacts would still end up in _add/target_ rather than _add/adder/target_.

## Depending on an External Package

- If we add the `rand` package to the _adder/Cargo.toml_ and _add_one/Cargo.toml_ files, Cargo will resolve both of those to one version of `rand` and record that in the one _Cargo.lock_. Making all crates in the workspace use the same dependencies means the crates will always be compatible with each other.

## Adding a Test to a Workspace

```rust
// add_one/src/lib.rs
pub fn add_one(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 1
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn it_works() {
        assert_eq!(3, add_one(2));
    }
}
```

```
$ cargo test
   Compiling add_one v0.1.0 (file:///projects/add/add_one)
   Compiling adder v0.1.0 (file:///projects/add/adder)
    Finished test [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.27s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/add_one-f0253159197f7841)

running 1 test
test tests::it_works ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

     Running unittests src/main.rs (target/debug/deps/adder-49979ff40686fa8e)

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests add_one

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

```

- The first section of the output shows that the `it_works` test in the `add_one` crate passed. The next section shows that zero tests were found in the `adder` crate

```
$ cargo test -p add_one
    Finished test [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.00s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/add_one-b3235fea9a156f74)

running 1 test
test tests::it_works ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests add_one

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

```

- We can also run tests for one particular crate in a workspace from the top-level directory by using the `-p` flag and specifying the name of the crate we want to test

# cargo install

```rust
$ cargo install ripgrep
    Updating crates.io index
  Downloaded ripgrep v13.0.0
  Downloaded 1 crate (243.3 KB) in 0.88s
  Installing ripgrep v13.0.0
--snip--
   Compiling ripgrep v13.0.0
    Finished release [optimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 3m 10s
  Installing ~/.cargo/bin/rg
   Installed package `ripgrep v13.0.0` (executable `rg`)

```

- The `cargo install` command allows you to install and use binary crates locally.
- All binaries installed with `cargo install` are stored in the installation root’s _bin_ folder. If you installed Rust using _rustup.rs_ and don’t have any custom configurations, this directory will be _$HOME/.cargo/bin_