## Types
- The principal built-in types are
  - numerics: `int`, `float`, `complex`
  - sequences: `tuple`, `list`, `range`, `str`
  - mappings: `dictionary`
  - classes
  - instances
  - exceptions
- There is **no constant** specifier in Python.
- [Built-in Types](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html)

## Number
- Python supports 3 different numerical types
  - int: `10`, `080`, `-0x260`
  <!-- - long: `51924361L`, `-0x19323L`, `0xDEFAEl` -->
  - float: `0.0`, `32.3+e18`, `70.2-E12`
  - complex: `3.14j`, `45.j`, `.876j`, `4.53e-7j`
- Use postfix `L` or `l` to declare a long number.
- A complex number consists of an ordered pair of real floating-point numbers denoted by x + yj.
```python
var1 = 1
var2 = 10
var3 = 42_572_654 # 42572654

del var1, var2
```
- In python, **numbers are immutable data types, means that changing the value of a number data type results in a newly allocated object**.
- You can also delete the reference to a number object by using the `del` statement.
- You can use `_` to separate numbers for readability.
- Python provides two mathematical constants
  - `pi`
  - `e`
- Member functions
  - complex
    - `conjugate()`: conjugate of the complex number c
  - int
    - `bit_length()`
    - `to_bytes(length, byteorder, *, signed=False)`: Return an array of bytes representing an integer.
  - float
    - `as_integer_ratio()`: Return a pair of integers whose ratio is exactly equal to the original float and with a positive denominator.
    - `is_integer()`
    - `hex()`
- Class functions
  - `int.from_bytes(bytes, byteorder, *, signed=False)`
  - `float.fromhex(s)`

## Sequence
- There are three basic sequence types: *lists*, *tuples*, and *range* objects.
- Common Sequence Operation
  - `index(x[, i[, j]])`: index of the first occurrence of x in s
  - `count(x)`: total number of occurrences of x in s.
  - `x in s`
  - `x not in s`
  - `s + t`
  - `s * n` or `n * s`: equivalent to adding s to itself n times
  - `s[i]`
  - `s[i:j]`
  - `s[i:j:k]`
  - `len(s)`
  - `min(s)`
  - `max(s)`
- Mutable sequence operation: list
  - `s[i] = x`
  - `s[i:j] = t`: slice of s from i to j is replaced by the contents of the iterable `t`
  - `s[i:j:k] = t`: the elements of `s[i:j:k]` are replaced by those of `t`
  - `del s[i:j]`: same as `s[i:j] = []`
  - `del s[i:j:k]`
  - `s.append(x)`
  - `s.clear()`
  - `s.copy()`: creates a shallow copy of s (same as `s[:]`)
  - `s.extend(t)` or `s += t`: extends s with the contents of t
  - `s.insert(i, x)`: inserts x into s at the index given by i (same as `s[i:i] = [x]`)
  - `s.pop([i])`
  - `s.remove(x)`: remove the first item from s where s[i] is equal to x
  - `s.reverse()`
***
- List
  ```python
  #!/usr/bin/python

  list = [ 'abcd', 786 , 2.23, 'john', 70.2 ]
  tinylist = [123, 'john']

  print(list)         # Prints complete list
  print(list[0])       # Prints first element of the list
  print(list[1:3])     # Prints elements starting from 2nd till 3rd 
  print(list[2:])     # Prints elements starting from 3rd element
  print(tinylist * 2) # [123, 'john', 123, 'john']
  print(list + tinylist) # Prints concatenated lists

  lists = [[] for i in range(3)]
  list[2] = [2001];
  print(lists) # [[], [], [2001]]
  ```
  - List can be **compound data types**.
  ```python
  aList = [123, 'xyz', 'zara', 'abc', 'xyz'];
  aList.sort();
  print "List : ", aList
  ``` 
  - `list.sort(*, key=None, reverse=False)`: sorts the list in place, using only < comparisons between items.
***
- Tuples
  ```python
  #!/usr/bin/python

  tuple = ( 'abcd', 786 , 2.23, 'john', 70.2  )
  tinytuple = (123, 'john')

  print(tuple)               # Prints the complete tuple
  print(tuple[0])            # Prints first element of the tuple
  print(tuple[1:3])          # Prints elements of the tuple starting from 2nd till 3rd 
  print(tuple[2:])         # Prints elements of the tuple starting from 3rd element
  print(tinytuple * 2)       # Prints the contents of the tuple twice
  print(tuple + tinytuple)   # Prints concatenated tuples
  ```
  - Unlike lists, however, tuples are enclosed within parentheses.
  - The main differences between lists and tuples are:
    - **List's elements and size can be changed**
    - Tuples cannot be updated and be thought of as **read-only** lists.
  - Removing individual tuple elements is not possible. 
  - Update or change the values of tuple elements.
  ```python
  print 'abc', -4.24e93, 18+6.6j, 'xyz';
  x, y = 1, 2;
  print "Value of x , y : ", x,y;
  ``` 
  - Any set of **multiple objects, comma-separated**, written without identifying symbols, default to tuples
***
- Ranges
  - The range type represents an **immutable sequence of numbers**
  - It is commonly used for looping a specific number of times in for loops.
  - A range object **will always take the same (small) amount of memory**, no matter the size of the range it represents.
  ```python
  list(range(10)) # [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
  list(range(1, 11)) # [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
  list(range(0, 30, 5)) # [0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25]
  list(range(0, 10, 3)) # [0, 3, 6, 9]
  list(range(0, -10, -1)) # [0, -1, -2, -3, -4, -5, -6, -7, -8, -9]
  list(range(0)) # []
  list(range(1, 0)) # []

  r = range(0, 20, 2) # range(0, 20, 2)
  11 in r # False
  ``` 
  - `range(stop)` or `range(start, stop[, step])`
    - If the start argument is omitted, it defaults to 0
  - Ranges implement all of the common sequence operations **except concatenation and repetition**
  

## String
- Strings are **immutable sequences** of Unicode code points.
- **Python does not support a character type**.
```python
#!/usr/bin/python

str = 'Hello World!'

str          # Prints complete string
str[0]       # Prints first character of the string
str[2:5]     # Prints characters starting from 3rd to 5th
str[2:]      # Prints string starting from 3rd character
str * 2      # Prints string two times
str + "TEST" # Prints concatenated string

("spam " "eggs") == "spam eggs"
```
- Strings are identified as a contiguous set of characters represented in the quotation marks.
- Subsets of strings can be taken using the slice operator (`[]` and `[:]`)
  - index `0` in the beginning of the string
  - index `-1` at the end.
- Two string having **only whitespace between** them will be implicitly converted to a single string literal.
- Escape Characters
  - `\a`: Bell or alert
  - `\b`: Backspace
  - `\cx`, `\C-x`: Control-x
  - `\e`: Escape
  - `\f`: Formfeed
  - `\M-\C-x`: Meta-Control-x
  - `\n`: Newline
  - `\nnn`: Octal notation, where n is in the range 0-7
  - `\r`: Carriage return
  - `\s`: Space
  - `\t`: Tab
  - `\v`: Vertical tab
  - `\x`: Character x
  - `\xnn`: Hexadecimal notation, where n is in the range 0-9, a-f, or A-F


- Triple Quotes
  ```python
  #!/usr/bin/python

  para_str = """this is a long string that is made up of
  several lines and non-printable characters such as
  TAB ( \t ) and they will show up that way when displayed.
  NEWLINEs within the string, whether explicitly given like
  this within the brackets [ \n ], or just a NEWLINE within
  the variable assignment will also show up.
  """
  print para_str
  ```
  - Triple quotes allow strings to span multiple lines, including verbatim NEWLINEs, TABs, and any other special characters.
- Prefix:
  - `r`: Raw String,  Suppresses actual meaning of Escape characters.
  ```python
  print r'\n' 
  ``` 
  - `u`: Unicode String
  ```python
  #!/usr/bin/python

  print u'Hello, world!'
  ``` 
  - `f`: formatted string literals
  ```python
  a = {"one": 1, "two": 2}
  b = "template"
  print(f"Hello, {b}: {a}") # Hello, template: {'one': 1, 'two': 2}
  ```

- String member function
  - `capitalize()`
  - `casefold()`: Return a casefolded copy of the string. For example, the German lowercase letter `ß` is equivalent to `ss`.
  - `center(width, fillchar)`: Returns a space-padded string with the original string centered to a total of width columns.
  - `count(str, beg=0, end=len(string))`: Counts how many times str occurs.
  - `decode(encoding='UTF-8',errors='strict')`: Decodes the string using the codec registered for encoding.
  - `encode(encoding='UTF-8',errors='strict')`: Returns encoded string version of string
  - `endswith(suffix, beg=0, end=len(string))`
  - `expandtabs(tabsize=8)`: Expands tabs in string to multiple spaces.
  - `find(str, beg=0 end=len(string))`
  - `format(*args, **kwargs)`: `The sum of 1 + 2 is {0}".format(1+2)`
  - `format_map(mapping)`: mapping is used directly and not copied to a dict.
  - `index(str, beg=0, end=len(string))`: Same as find(), but raises an exception if str not found.
  - `isalnum()`
  - `isalpha()`
  - `isdigit()`
  - `islower()`
  - `isnumeric()`
  - `isspace()`
  - `istitle()`: Returns true if string is properly "titlecased" and false otherwise.
  - `isupper()`
  - `join(seq)`: Merges string sequence into a string, with the separator string.
  - `ljust(width[, fillchar])`: Returns a space-padded string with the original string left-justified to a total of width columns.
  - `lower()`: Converts all uppercase letters in string to lowercase.
  - `lstrip()`: Removes all leading whitespace in string.
  - `maketrans()`: Returns a translation table to be used in translate function.
  - `replace(old, new [, max])`
  - `rfind(str, beg=0,end=len(string))`: Same as `find()`, but search backwards in string.
  - `rindex( str, beg=0, end=len(string))`: Same as `index()`, but search backwards in string.
  - `rjust(width,[, fillchar])`: Returns a space-padded string with the original string right-justified to a total of width columns.
  - `rstrip()`: Removes all trailing whitespace of string.
  - `split(str="", num=string.count(str))`
  - `splitlines( num=string.count('\n'))`
  - `startswith(str, beg=0,end=len(string))`
  - `strip([chars])`: Performs both lstrip() and rstrip() on string.
  - `swapcase()`: Inverts case for all letters in string.
  - `title()`: Returns "titlecased" version of string, that is, all words begin with uppercase and the rest are lowercase.
  - `translate(table, deletechars="")`: Translates string according to translation table str(256 chars), removing those in the del string.
  - `upper()`
  - `zfill (width)`: returns original string leftpadded with zeros to a total of width characters.
  - `isdecimal()`

## Set
- A set object is an **unordered collection of distinct hashable objects**.
- There are currently two built-in set types, `set` and `frozenset`.
  - The `set` type is mutable, and thus it has **no hash value** and cannot be used as either a dictionary key or as an element of another set.
  - The `frozenset` type is immutable and hashable.

## Dictionary
- **Keys must be of an immutable data type** such as strings, numbers, tuples, or `frozenset`.
- If we attempt to **access a data item with a non-existing key we get an error**.
```python
#!/usr/bin/python

a = dict(one=1, two=2, three=3)
b = {'one': 1, 'two': 2, 'three': 3}
c = dict(zip(['one', 'two', 'three'], [1, 2, 3]))
d = dict([('two', 2), ('one', 1), ('three', 3)])
e = dict({'three': 3, 'one': 1, 'two': 2})
a == b == c == d # True

dict = {}
dict['one'] = "This is one"
dict[2]     = "This is two"

tinydict = {'name': 'john','code':6734, 'dept': 'sales'}

dict['one']       # Prints value for 'one' key
dict[2]           # Prints value for 2 key
tinydict          # Prints complete dictionary
tinydict.keys()   # Prints all the keys
tinydict.values() # Prints all the values
```
- Python's dictionaries are kind of hash table type.
- Values can be any arbitrary Python object, either standard objects or user-defined objects.
- Member methods
  - `clear()`
  - `copy()`: Returns a shallow copy of dictionary dict
  - `get(key, default=None)`: For key key, returns value or default if key not in dictionary
  - `setdefault(key, default=None)`: Similar to get(), but will set `dict[key]=default` if key is not already in dict
  - `update(dict2)`: Adds dictionary `dict2`'s key-values pairs to dict
  - `has_key(key)`
  - `items()`: Returns a list of *dict's (key, value) tuple pairs*
  - `keys()`: Returns list of dictionary dict's keys
  - `values()`: Returns list of dictionary dict's values
  - `pop(key[, default])`: If key is in the dictionary, remove it and return its value, else return default.
  - `popitem()`: Pairs are returned in LIFO order
  - `reversed(d)
- Class functions
  - `dict.fromkeys(seq[, value])`: Create a new dictionary with keys from seq and values set to value.