## Modules
- As your program gets longer, you may want to split it into several files for easier maintenance.
- Python has a way to **put definitions in a file** and use them in a script or in an interactive instance of the interpreter. Such a file is called a *module*.
- Definitions from a module can be *imported* into other modules or into the *main module*.
- Each module has its own private symbol table. The author of a module can use global variables in the module without worrying about accidental clashes with a user's global variables. 
- It is customary but **not required to place all import statements at the beginning** of a module
```python
# fibo.py

def fib(n):    # write Fibonacci series up to n
    a, b = 0, 1
    while a < n:
        print(a, end=' ')
        a, b = b, a+b
    print()

def fib2(n):   # return Fibonacci series up to n
    result = []
    a, b = 0, 1
    while a < n:
        result.append(a)
        a, b = b, a+b
    return result
```
```python
import fibo

fibo.fib(1000)
fibo.fib2(100)
fibo.__name__ # 'fibo'
```
- The file name is the module name with the suffix `.py` appended
- When the interpreter encounters an import statement, it imports the module if the module is present in the *search path*.
- The module's name is available as the value of the global variable `__name__`.
- A module is loaded only once, regardless of the number of times it is imported.
```python
from fibo import fib, fib2
fibo(5) 
``` 
- `from modname import name1[, ...nameN]` i**mports names from a module directly into the importing module's symbol table**. Thus, the module's namespace is skipped.
- `from modname import *`: provides an easy way to import all the items from a module
  - This statement should be used sparingly.
```python
import fibo as fib
fib.fib(500)
```
```python
from fibo import fib as fibonacci
fibonacci(500)
```
- If the module name is followed by `as`, then the name following `as` is bound directly to the imported module.
```python
a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
import fibo
fib = fibo.fib
dir(fibo) # ['__name__', 'fib', 'fib2']
dir() # ['__builtins__', '__name__', 'a', 'fib', 'fibo', 'sys']
``` 
- `dir()` is used to find out which names a module defines.
- Without arguments, `dir()` lists the names you have defined currently
  - `dir()` does **not list the names of built-in functions and variables**
  ```python
  import builtins
  dir(builtins) 
  ```
  - If you want a list of those, they are defined in the standard module `builtins`.

## Search Path
- Python interpreter searches for the module in the following sequences
  - Built-in module
  - Searches for a file in a list of directories given by the variable `sys.path`. `sys.path` is initialized
    - The directory containing the input script (or the current directory when no file is specified)
    - `PYTHONPATH`: an environment variable, consisting of a list of directories
    - The installation-dependent default. On UNIX, this default path is normally `/usr/local/lib/python/`.
- Python programs can modify `sys.path`. 

## Packages
- Packages are a way of structuring Python's module namespace by using “dotted module names”
  - The module name `A.B` designates a submodule named `B` in a package named `A`
```
sound/                          Top-level package
      __init__.py               Initialize the sound package
      formats/                  Subpackage for file format conversions
              __init__.py
              wavread.py
              wavwrite.py
              aiffread.py
              aiffwrite.py
              auread.py
              auwrite.py
              ...
      effects/                  Subpackage for sound effects
              __init__.py
              echo.py
              surround.py
              reverse.py
              ...
      filters/                  Subpackage for filters
              __init__.py
              equalizer.py
              vocoder.py
              karaoke.py
              ...
``` 
- The **`__init__.py` files are required** to make Python treat directories containing the file as packages.
- In the simplest case, `__init__.py` can just be an empty file.
```python
# sound/effects/__init__.py
__all__ = ["echo", "surround", "reverse"]
``` 
- `__init__.py` can execute initialization code for the package or set the `__all__` variable.
- If a package's `__init__.py` code defines a list named `__all__`, it is taken to be the list of module names that should be imported when from package `import *` is encountered.
- If `__all__` is not defined, the statement `from sound.effects import *` does not import all submodule.
```python
import sound.effects.echo
sound.effects.echo.echofilter(input, output, delay=0.7, atten=4)
``` 
```python
from sound.effects import echo
echo.echofilter(input, output, delay=0.7, atten=4)
```
```python
from sound.effects.echo import echofilter
echofilter(input, output, delay=0.7, atten=4)
```
- When using syntax like import item.subitem.subsubitem, each item except for the last must be a package.
- The last item can be a module or a package but **can't be a class or function or variable** defined in the previous item.