## Output
- There are two ways of writing values
  - `print()`
  - `sys.stdout`
- Formatting
  ```python
  year = 2016
  event = 'Referendum'
  f'Results of the {year} {event}' # 'Results of the 2016 Referendum'

  print(f'The value of pi is approximately {math.pi:.3f}.')

  table = {'Sjoerd': 4127, 'Jack': 4098, 'Dcab': 7678}
  for name, phone in table.items():
    print(f'{name:10} ==> {phone:10d}')

  animals = 'eels'
  print(f'My hovercraft is full of {animals!r}.')
  ``` 
  - To use *formatted string literals*, begin a string with `f` or `F` before the opening quotation mark.
  - An *optional format specifier* can follow the expression. 
  - Passing an integer after the `:` will cause that field to be a minimum number of characters wide.
  - `!r` applies `repr()`
  ```python
  print('We are the {} who say "{}!"'.format('knights', 'Ni')) # We are the knights who say "Ni!"

  print('{0} and {1}'.format('spam', 'eggs')) # spam and eggs
  print('{1} and {0}'.format('spam', 'eggs')) # eggs and spam

  yes_votes = 42_572_654
  no_votes = 43_132_495
  percentage = yes_votes / (yes_votes + no_votes)
  '{:-9} YES votes  {:2.2%}'.format(yes_votes, percentage) # ' 42572654 YES votes  49.67%'

  print('This {food} is {adjective}.'.format(
    food='spam', adjective='absolutely horrible'))

  table = {'Sjoerd': 4127, 'Jack': 4098, 'Dcab': 8637678}
  print('Jack: {0[Jack]:d}; Sjoerd: {0[Sjoerd]:d}; '
      'Dcab: {0[Dcab]:d}'.format(table))
  print('Jack: {Jack:d}; Sjoerd: {Sjoerd:d}; Dcab: {Dcab:d}'.format(**table))
  ```
  - **A number in the brackets** can be used to **refer to the position of the object** passed into the `str.format()` method
  - `str.format()`: use `{` and `}` to mark where a variable will be substituted and can provide detailed formatting directive.
  - Positional and keyword arguments can be arbitrarily combined.
  - You can use `[]` to access the keys of the dicts.
- Old string formatting
  ```python
  import math
  print('The value of pi is approximately %5.3f.' % math.pi)
  ```
  - `%` operator can also be used for string formatting.
  - This operation is commonly known as *string interpolation*.

## Input
- Python provides two built-in functions to read a line of text from standard input
  - `raw_input`
  - `input`
```python
str = raw_input("Enter your input: ")
print("Received input is : ", str)
```
- The `raw_input([prompt])` function reads one line from standard input 
```python
str = input("Enter your input: ")
print("Received input is : ", str)
``` 
- The `input([prompt])` function assumes the input is a valid Python **expression** and returns the evaluated result to you

## Files
```
file object = open(file_name [, access_mode][, buffering])
```
- `open()` returns a file object,
- access_mode
  - `r`: Opens a file for reading only.
  - `rb`: Opens a file for reading only in binary format
  - `r+`: Opens a file for both reading and writin
  - `rb+`: 
  - `w`: Opens a file for writing only. Overwrites the file if the file exists. If the file does not exist, creates a new file for writing.
  - `wb`:
  - `w+`: Opens a file for both writing and reading. 
  - `wb+`:
  - `a`: Opens a file for appending. If the file does not exist, it creates a new file for writing.
  - `ab`
  - `a+`: Opens a file for both appending and reading. 
  - `ab+`:
- `file` attributes and methods
  - `closed`
  - `mode`
  - `name`
  - `softspace`
  - `close()`
  - `write(str)`: writes the contents and returns the number of characters written
  - `read([size])`: reads some quantity of data and returns it as a string. When `size` is omitted or negative, the entire contents of the file will be read and returned.
  - `readline()`: if `f.readline()` returns an empty string, the end of the file has been reached.
  - `tell()`:  returns an integer giving the file object’s current position.
  - `seek(offset[, whence=0])`: change the file object’s position
    - The position is computed from adding `offset` to a reference point (`whence`)
    - `whence` value 
      - `0` measures from the beginning of the file
      - `1` uses the current file position
      - `2` uses the end of the file as the reference point
```python
with open('workfile') as f:
  read_data = f.read()

f.closed # True
```
- It is good practice to use the `with` keyword when dealing with file object.
  - The file is properly closed after its suite finishes.
  - Using with is also much shorter than writing equivalent `try`-`finally` blocks and call `close() `manually.
- The `with` statement allows objects like files to be used in a way that **ensures they are always cleaned up promptly and correctly**.
```python
with open('workfile') as f:
  for line in f:
    print(line, end='')
``` 
- For reading lines from a file, you can **loop over the file object**. 
***
- `os`
  - `os.rename(current_file_name, new_file_name)`
  - `os.remove(file_name)`
  - `os.mkdir(dir)`
  - `os.rmdir(dir)`
  - `os.chdir(dir):`: use the `chdir()` method to change the current directory.
  - `os.getcwd()`: displays the current working directory