## Exception
- Even if a statement or expression is syntactically correct, it may cause an error when an attempt is made to execute it.
- Errors detected during execution are called *exceptions*, 
- Most exceptions are not handled by programs, however, and result in error messages like
  ```python
  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
  ZeroDivisionError: division by zero
  ```
  - The last line of the error message indicates what happened
- Standard exception names are built-in identifiers (not reserved).
```python
while True:
  try:
    x = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
    break
  except ValueError:
    print("Oops!  That was no valid number.  Try again...")
  except (RuntimeError, TypeError, NameError):
    pass
  except Exception as inst:
    print(type(inst))    # the exception instance
    print(inst.args)     # arguments stored in .args
    print(inst)          # __str__ allows args to be printed directly,
    x, y = inst.args     # unpack args
    print('x =', x)
    print('y =', y)
  except:
    print("Unexpected error:", sys.exc_info()[0])
    raise
  else:
    print("no exception")
  finally:
    print('Goodbye, world!')
``` 
- The try statement works as follow
  1. `try` clause is executed
  2. If no exception occurs, the `except` clause is skipped
  3. If an exception occurs during execution of the try clause, the rest of the clause is skipped. If its type matches the exception named after the except keyword, the `except` clause is executed,
  4. If an exception occurs which does not match the exception named in the except clause, the **exception is re-raised** after the `finally` clause has been executed.
    
1. 
- A `try` statement may have more than one except clause, but at most one handler will be executed.
- An `except` clause may name multiple exceptions as a parenthesized tuple.
- The last `except` clause may omit the exception name(s), to serve as a wildcard. 
- The `try … except` statement has an optional `else` clause that **will be executed if the try clause does not `raise` an exception**.
- The `except` clause may specify a variable after the exception name.
  - The arguments of an exception is stored in `instance.args`.
  - Usually, `__str__()` is implemented in exception classes, and thus can be printed directly without having to reference `.args`.
- The `finally` clause runs whether or not the `try` statement produces an exception.
    - If a finally clause includes a return statement, the returned value will be the one from the finally clause’s return statement.
***
- Exception class
  - **Exceptions should typically be derived from the `Exception` class**.
  ```python
  class B(Exception):
      pass

  class C(B):
      pass

  class D(C):
      pass

  # This prints B C D
  for cls in [B, C, D]:
      try:
          raise cls()
      except D:
          print("D")
      except C:
          print("C")
      except B:
          print("B")

  # This prints B B B
  for cls in [B, C, D]:
      try:
          raise cls()
      except B:
          print("B")
      except C:
          print("C")
      except D:
          print("D")

  ```
  - A class in an except clause is compatible with an exception if it is the same class or a base class
***
- `raise`
  ```python
  raise NameError('HiThere')
  raise ValueError
  ```
  - The `raise` statement allows the programmer to force a specified exception to occur.
  - If an `exception` class is passed, it will be **implicitly instantiated** by calling its constructor with no arguments.
  ```python
  try:
      raise NameError('HiThere')
  except NameError:
      print('An exception flew by!')
      raise
  ``` 
  - If you need to determine whether an exception was raised but don’t intend to handle it,  pure `raise` statement allows you to **re-raise the exception**.
- Exception Chaining
  ```python
  def func():
    raise IOError
  
  try:
      func()
  except IOError as exc:
      raise RuntimeError('Failed to open database') from exc
  ```
  - The raise statement allows an optional from which enables chaining exceptions
  - The expression following the from must be either an `exception` or `None`
  - **Exception chaining happens automatically** when an exception is raised inside an exception handler or finally section.


## [Built-in Exception](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#bltin-exceptions)
