## Scope and Namespace
- The scope of a variable determines the portion of the program where you can access a particular identifier. 
- There are two basic scopes of variables in Python
  - Global variables
  - Local variables
- Variables that are defined inside a function body have a local scope, otherwise they are global.
- Local variables can be accessed only inside the function in which they are declared.
***
- **Namespace**
  - A namespace is a mapping from names (keys) to objects (values). 
  - Namespaces are created at different moments and have different lifetimes
    - The namespace containing the built-in names is created when the Python interpreter starts up
    - The global namespace for a module is created when the module definition is read in.
    - The local namespace for a function is created when the function is called, and deleted when the function returns or raises an exception
  - Most namespaces are currently implemented as Python dictionaries, but that’s normally not noticeable in any way.
  - There is absolutely no relation between names in different namespaces
  ```python
  #!/usr/bin/python

  Money = 2000
  def AddMoney():
    global Money
    Money = Money + 1

  print(Money)
  AddMoney()
  print(Money)
  ``` 
  - Python assumes that any variable assigned a value in a function is local.
  - In order **to assign a value to a global variable within a function**, you must first use the `global` statement.
***
- **Scope**
  - A scope is a textual region of a Python program where a namespace is directly accessible.
  - Although scopes are determined statically, they are **used dynamically.**
  - If a name is declared global, then all references and assignments go directly to the middle scope containing the module’s global names, the `nonlocal` statement can be used.
    - If not declared `nonlocal`, those variables are read-only
    - An attempt to write to such a variable will simply create a new local variable
***
```python
def scope_test():
  def do_local():
    spam = "local spam"

  def do_nonlocal():
    nonlocal spam
    spam = "nonlocal spam"

  def do_global():
    global spam
    spam = "global spam"

  spam = "test spam"
  do_local()
  print("After local assignment:", spam)
  do_nonlocal()
  print("After nonlocal assignment:", spam)
  do_global()
  print("After global assignment:", spam)

scope_test()
print("In global scope:", spam)

# After local assignment: test spam
# After nonlocal assignment: nonlocal spam
# After global assignment: nonlocal spam
# In global scope: global spam
```
- The `global` assignment changed the module-level binding.
- The `nonlocal` statement  causes the listed identifiers to refer to previously bound variables in the nearest enclosing scope **excluding globals**,

## Class
- Ideally, you should define your classes in separate file, then you should import them in your main program file using import statement.
- You could conceivably place a class definition in a branch of an if statement, or inside a function.
- Classes are **not** usable to implement **pure abstract data types**.
```python
class Employee:
  'Common base class for all employees'
  empCount = 0

  def __init__(self, name, salary):
    self.name = name
    self.salary = salary
    Employee.empCount += 1
  
  def displayCount(self):
    print "Total Employee %d" % Employee.empCount

  def displayEmployee(self):
    print "Name : ", self.name,  ", Salary: ", self.salary
```
- The variable `empCount` is a *class variable*.
- `__init__(self [, ...args])` is a special method, which is called class constructor or initialization method
- The first argument of a method is called `self`. This is nothing more than a convention.
- In practice, the statements inside a class definition will *usually* be function definitions
- When a class definition is entered, a new namespace is created, and used as the local scope.
***
```python
class MyClass:
    """A simple example class"""
    i = 12345

    def f(self):
        return 'hello world'

x = MyClass()
```
- When a class definition is left normally, a *class object* is created. 
- Class objects support two kinds of operations: *attribute references* and *instantiation*.
  - Attribute references
    - `MyClass.i` and `MyClass.f` are valid attribute references.
    - **You can change the value of `MyClass.i` by assignment**.
    - `__doc__` is also a valid attribute
  - Class instantiation
    - It uses  uses function notation
    ```python
    def __init__(self):
      self.data = []
    ``` 
    - A class may define a special method named `__init__()`
    - When a class defines an` __init__()` method, class instantiation automatically invokes `__init__()` for the newly-created class instance. 
    ```python
    class Complex:
    def __init__(self, realpart, imagpart):
      self.r = realpart
      self.i = imagpart

    x = Complex(3.0, -4.5)
    x.r, x.i
    ``` 
    - `__init__()` method may have arguments for greater flexibility.
***
- Instance object
  - The only operations understood by instance objects are *attribute references*.
  - There are two kinds of valid attribute names: *data attributes* and *methods*.
  - *data attribute*
    - data attributes correspond to “data members” in C++
    - They spring into existence when they are first assigned to
  - *method*
    - A method is a function that “belongs to” an object.
    - By definition, all attributes of a class that are function objects define corresponding methods of its instances.
    - `x.f` is not the same thing as `MyClass.f` — it is a method object, not a function object.
    ```python
    xf = x.f
    while True:
        print(xf())
    ``` 
    - It is not necessary to call a method right away: `x.f` is a method object, and c**an be stored away and called at a later time**.
    - **Call `x.f()` is exactly equivalent to `MyClass.f(x)`**.
***
```python
class Dog:
    tricks = []             # mistaken use of a class variable

    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name

    def add_trick(self, trick):
        self.tricks.append(trick)

d = Dog('Fido')
e = Dog('Buddy')
d.add_trick('roll over')
e.add_trick('play dead')
d.tricks                # unexpectedly shared by all dogs
# ['roll over', 'play dead']
```
- **Instance variables** are for data unique to each instance
- **Class variables** are for attributes and methods shared by all instances of the class
```python
class Dog:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
        self.tricks = []    # creates a new empty list for each dog

    def add_trick(self, trick):
        self.tricks.append(trick)
``` 
- Correct design of the class should use an instance variable instead
***
```python
#!/usr/bin/python

class Point:
   def __init__( self, x=0, y=0):
      self.x = x
      self.y = y
   def __del__(self):
      class_name = self.__class__.__name__
      print class_name, "destroyed"

pt1 = Point()
pt2 = pt1
pt3 = pt1
print(id(pt1), id(pt2), id(pt3)) # prints the ids of the obejcts
# 3083401324 3083401324 3083401324
del pt1
del pt2
del pt3
# Point destroyed
``` 
- A class can implement the special method `__del__()`, called a *destructor*, that is invoked when the instance is about to be destroyed.
- Use `id(obj)` to identity of an object.

## Class Inheritance
```python
#!/usr/bin/python

class Parent:        # define parent class
   parentAttr = 100
   def __init__(self):
      print("Calling parent constructor")

   def parentMethod(self):
      print('Calling parent method')

   def setAttr(self, attr):
      Parent.parentAttr = attr

   def getAttr(self):
      print("Parent attribute :", Parent.parentAttr)

class Child(Parent): # define child class
   def __init__(self):
      print("Calling child constructor")

   def childMethod(self):
      print('Calling child method')

c = Child()          # instance of child
c.childMethod()      # child calls its method
c.parentMethod()     # calls parent's method
c.setAttr(200)       # again call parent's method
c.getAttr()          # again call parent's method
```
- You can create a class by deriving it from a preexisting class.
- Python supports a form of **multiple inheritance** as well.
- A child class can also override data members and methods from the parent.
```python
class Parent:        # define parent class
   def myMethod(self):
      print 'Calling parent method'

class Child(Parent): # define child class
   def myMethod(self):
      Parent.myMethod(self)
      print 'Calling child method'

c = Child()          # instance of child
c.myMethod()         # child calls overridden method
```
- For C++ programmers: all methods in Python are effectively `virtual`.
- There is some ways to **call the base class method**:
  - `BaseClassName.methodname(self, arguments)`
  - `super().method(args)`
- Use `isinstance(obj, type)` to check an instance’s type. For example, `isinstance(obj, int)` will be `True` only if `obj.__class__` is `int` .
- Use `issubclass(cls1, cls2)` to check class inheritance: For example, `issubclass(bool, int)` is True since `bool` is a subclass of `int`

## Static methods
```python
class C(object):
    @classmethod
    def fun(cls, arg1, arg2, ...):

    @staticmethod
    def fun(arg1, arg2, ...):
```
- `@classmethod` decorator, is a builtin function decorator that is an expression that gets evaluated after your function is defined. 
- A class method is a method that is bound to a class rather than its object.
- It doesn't require creation of a class instance, much like `staticmethod`.
- The difference between a static method and a class method is:
  - Static method knows nothing about the class
  - Class method works with the class since its parameter is always the class itself.

## Private Variables
- "Private" instance variables that cannot be accessed except from inside an object.
- A name prefixed with an underscore (`_attr`) should be treated as a non-public part of the API **conventionally**.
- A name prefixed with at least two underscore (`__attr`) is textually replaced with `_classname__attr`, which is called *name mangling*.
```python
class Mapping:
    def __init__(self, iterable):
        self.items_list = []
        self.__update(iterable)

    def update(self, iterable):
        for item in iterable:
            self.items_list.append(item)

    __update = update   # private copy of original update() method

class MappingSubclass(Mapping):
    def update(self, keys, values):
        # provides new signature for update()
        # but does not break __init__()
        for item in zip(keys, values):
            self.items_list.append(item)
```
- Name mangling is **helpful for letting subclasses override methods** without breaking intraclass method calls. 
- The above example would work even if MappingSubclass were to introduce a `__update` identifier since it is replaced with `_Mapping__update` in the Mapping class and `_MappingSubclass__update` in the `MappingSubclass` class respectively.

## Garbage Collection
- Python deletes unneeded objects automatically.
- Python's garbage collector runs during program execution and is triggered when an object's **reference count reaches zero**.
```python
a = 40      # Create object <40>
b = a       # Increase ref. count  of <40> 
c = [b]     # Increase ref. count  of <40> 

del a       # Decrease ref. count  of <40>
b = 100     # Decrease ref. count  of <40> 
c[0] = -1   # Decrease ref. count  of <40> 
``` 
- An object's reference count increases when it is assigned a new name or placed in a container.
- The object's reference count decreases when it's **deleted** with `del`, its reference is **reassigned**, or its reference goes **out of scope**.
